Magic in the world of [[Asgaea]] is ever present in all things, shaping the world in the same way that gravity, electromagnetism and other fundamental forces do. All creatures, inanimate objects, and even concepts and societies use magic in one way or another to create effects that would be impossible otherwise, such as a forest of floating trees, impossibly large animals, or "mundane" people surviving the collapse of a mountain.

Many cultures have their own explanations and theories on how magic works and teach the aspect of it that are most familiar or useful to them. There still exists some texts belonging to the [[Shapers of Babylon]], preserved mostly by the [[Fandol]], which explain magic in a very comprehensive way as it was studied and taught during the [[Divine era]]:
# Essence
In this world there is an energy, a permanent field that exists in and around all things, invisible to us like air, and much like with wind we can see its effect all around us. This energy is called **Essence**, it is more dense in solid object and exceptionally concentrated in living beings, and it is believed essence itself is the substance of consciousness. Despite its ubiquity Essence is not the same everywhere, it changes and shifts subtly but decidedly in such a way that one can distinguish the essence belonging to a rock from the essence belonging to a tree. Those with [[Mirrorsight]] describe it as the essence having different "colours", "tastes" or "sound", or simply feeling different in some. Even two items that are by all other accounts identical will have different essences since the items are still distinct. This unique property is called **Resonance**.

The resonance of essence can be used to identify specific items, specific people, or even if one is trained enough to distinguish when a creature is thinking about something in specific. On its essence, it is written the history of every part of the object it belongs to, and some say even its future. Being able to read resonances in such a way is usually only possible for divine spirits, who have the time and talent to hone their abilities. For mortals, mere approximations must suffice.

The resonance of everything is in constant flux, affected by the resonance of everything around and even the mere thoughts of creatures close enough. Just like how in the material world we can see that certain changes will have effect on other things, so does changing the essence of an item affect its surroundings. For most people this is not something that can be exploited as they can only influence essence directly in minimal amounts and should instead focus on changing the world through mundane means. For some exceptional people known as [[Mages]] can, either through talent or training, project their own essence into other things in such a way that the essence of their target changes meaningfully, and in the same way that altering an item directly impacts is resonance, modifying its resonance will affect the item. This **Essence manipulation** is the base of all advanced forms of magic.

To give a concrete example, lets suppose a group of people want to dig a tunnel through a mountain. They could do so in the mundane way and dig a tunnel using tools, time, and great effort. Or, if a mage is present, they could alter the resonance of the mountain so it becomes the same mountain but with a tunnel through it. This requires three things: A deep understanding of mountains, tunnels, and how the essence of a mountain should be modified to manifest the change; absolute control and concentration to alter the resonance in the exactly desired way; and ludicrously large amounts of essence that the mage can inject into the mountain to be able to alter its resonance. This process of injecting essence in an item in order to alter its resonance to create a specific effect is known as **Shaping**.

Before doing any shaping, mages usually perform a process of **Gathering** where they accumulate the right amount of essence with the right properties from multiple sources. If a mage could only ever use its own essence for magic it would be limited only to exceptionally small tasks and it would not be worth studying. Common sources of essence used when gathering are:
- Meditation can empower the soul of a mage over time, allowing it to produce more essence.
- [[Essence gems]] can store large amounts of essence for later use and are a good way of stockpiling it.
- Large rituals can be conducted to extract essence from other living beings.

While useful, none of these methods yield the amount of essence required for noteworthy feats, so how is it that mages are able to perform such incredible displays of power? The discovery of [[The Mirrors]] and the advice of divine spirits gave the early mages the edge they needed.
# Attunement and Casting
[[Mages]] can, through training and with help of special items or rituals known as [[focus]], alter their own resonance to be connected to one or more of [[The Mirrors]] in a process known as **Attunement**. While the mage is attuned, they can gather essence directly from the endless supply of the mirrors. The process of Attuning, gathering and finally shaping it is know as **Casting**.

Casting creates additional challenges over basic essence manipulation. Marinating attunement requires a lot of concentration and self-control and gathering the right amount of essence is a very delicate process. If a mage draws in too much essence or of the wrong type the effect that they are trying to create will not work. In many cases, when excessive essence is drawn, the excess energy will backfire creating uncontrollable side-effects that tend to be dangerous. In addition to that, shaping becomes more difficult as the amount of essence gathered from the mirrors is orders of magnitude larger than anything used with any other methods, and since is essence not directly produced by the soul of the mage they have much less control over it. All these additional challenges can be conquered through intense training and with the help of tools. The reward is the ability to manipulate the world on a scale comparable to divine spirits, in a way that would be impossible otherwise. Such is the difference between casting and all other forms of essence manipulation that only the former is commonly recognized as "magic" while everything else is mundane by comparison.

Even if the essence used to cast spells is gathered from the mirrors, mages still spend part of their own essence in order to be able to control and maintain their casts. This creates a physical limit for every mage on how much they can cast and how large and complex the effects they can create are. These limits can be pushed through training for more efficient control and through the use of [[Essence gems]], meditation, and other sources to recover the mage's own essence.
# Resonance
As explained above, essence encodes a unique property called **Resonance** which serves to both describe and shape the items that the essence belongs to. A common simile to understand how resonance works, is to imagine reality as a blank canvas with paint being essence and the colour that paint is being its resonance. In this way, in order to create a specific image, multiple colours must be mixed together and laid over the canvas in specific patterns to convey the meaning of whatever is being painted.

In the same way that with paints there are basic colours that can be mixed in order to create others, there are also **Basic Resonances** which combine to create every other possible essence. Each of these four basic essence comes from one of [[The Mirrors]] and its energy is uniquely tied to certain aspects of existence, making them specially apt for creating certain types of effects. [[Mury'el]] named these four basic essences based on the feelings needed to attune to them, as well as the common personality traits shared by mages specialized in them:
- **Essence of selflessness** comes from [[Heaven]] and is associated with the [[Seraphs]]. It is used to manipulate nature, heal wounds, and create light.
- **Essence of wisdom** comes from [[Limbo]] and is associated with the [[Leviathans]]. It is used to manipulate thoughts, altering the shape of objects and to collect information.
- **Essence of determination** comes from [[Hell]] and is associated with the [[Nephilim]]. It is used to alter one self, breaking and decaying, and forcefully take other's essence.
- **Essence of passion** comes from [[Chaos]] and is associated with the [[Behemoths]]. It is used to alter the physical world, create things from nothing, and changing the substance of items.